.\" This file is part of the Lightweight Universal Network Analyzer (LUNA)
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Fiona Klute
.\"
.\" LUNA is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" LUNA is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
.\" or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public
.\" License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with LUNA. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH LUNA 1 2013-11-04 "LUNA" "LUNA Manual"

.SH NAME
luna \- generate and record packets to measure network performance

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B luna
-s|-c SERVER [OPTIONS]...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
LUNA, short for "Lightweight Universal Network Analyzer", is a system
to analyze network behavior under different network loads. LUNA can
generate UDP packets following configured distributions (client mode),
or receive and log them (server mode). Optionally, if requested by the
client, the server will echo packets back to the client for round trip
time measurements. The LUNA source provides tools based on GNU Octave
for parsing logs and plot results, but you can also create your own
analysis tools.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-s
Run in server mode. \fB\-s\fR and \fB\-c\fR are mutually exclusive.

.TP
.B \-c SERVER
Run in client mode, send to the specified server. The server can be
given by hostname, IPv4 or IPv6 address. \fB\-c\fR and \fB\-s\fR are
mutually exclusive.

.TP
.B \-p PORT
Use the specified port. In server mode, \fBluna\fR binds this UDP
port for listening. In client mode, this is used as the destination
port.

.TP
.B \-4
Run in IPv4 only mode

.TP
.B \-6
Run in IPv6 only mode

.TP
.B \-T
Write recorded data as tab separated output. This is required to use
the analysis tools provided by LUNA, and strongly recommended if you
want to write your own. May become default behavior in the future.

.TP
.B \-t SECONDS
Send for the given number of seconds (client mode only)

.TP
.B \-g GENERATOR
Use the named generator (client mode only). Default is "static". See
\fBGENERATORS\fR below.

.TP
.B \-a ARGS
Pass the specified arguments to the configured generator (see option
.BR \-g ).
Generator arguments must be written in the format
name=value,... Acceptable names and values depend on the
generator. Packet intervals are generally given in microseconds.

.TP
.B \-e
Request echo packets for round trip time measurements (client mode only)

.TP
.B \-o FILE
Write recorded results to FILE instead of standard out

.SH EXIT STATUS
.P
.B 0
if execution completed normally, non-zero in case of an error. In the
latter case,
.BR luna
will output an error message for the user. Error exit codes are
defined in
.BR luna.h .

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.P
Generators using random generators from the GNU Scientific Library
(libgsl) may be influenced by the environment variables evaluated in
.BR gsl_rng_env_setup (),
see section "Random number environment variables" in the libgsl
handbook.

.SH GENERATORS
.P
A \fBgenerator\fR is a component of the LUNA client that provides
sizes and intervals for sending packets. You can choose between some
pre-defined generators or write your own. Each generator must provide
a creation function that returns a \fBgenerator_t\fR variable as
defined in \fBgenerator.h\fR. The same header also provides useful
helper functions. Generators usually accept arguments from the command
line, see option \fB-a\fR.

.P
Currently available generators are:

.TP
.B static
Generate packets with a fixed size and interval, as defined by
generator arguments \fBsize\fR and
\fBinterval\fR.

.TP
.B random_size
Use packet sizes evenly distributed between the provided \fBsize\fR
argument and the minimum size required by the LUNA protocol. The
\fBinterval\fR argument is used as a static value.

.TP
.B alt_time
Alternate packet intervals between the provided \fBinterval\fR
argument and double that value every ten packets. The \fBsize\fR
argument is used as a static value. This generator is primarily an
example.

.TP
.B gaussian
This generator creates packets with sizes following a Gaussian
distribution, based on a random generator provided by
\fBlibgsl\fR. Three parameters can be configured: \fBmax\fR sets the
maximum permitted packet size, \fBsigma\fR is the standard deviation
for the Gaussian distribution, and \fBinterval\fR the static packet
interval. The distributions mean value will be half the
maximum. Random values above and below the permitted range will be
replaced with the maximum and minimum values, respectively. Behavior
and available arguments of this generator will likely change in the
future for more flexibility.

.P
Unless mentioned otherwise, all generators listed above use a default
packet interval of 1000µs.

.SH NOTES

.P
LUNA tries to acquire realtime priority and lock its memory into RAM
to optimize timing performance. This requires the \fBCAP_IPC_LOCK\fR
and \fBCAP_SYS_NICE\fR capabilities. The \fB./configure\fR script
provides the option \fB\-\-enable\-capabilities\fR to set file
capabilities at install time using
.BR setcap (8),
but whether using this option is appropriate depends on the system's
security policy, see
.BR capabilities (7)
for details. LUNA will work without these capabilities, but likely
with reduced performance.

.P
For optimal timing precision, it is recommended to use LUNA with a
\%PREEMPT_RT patched Linux kernel to avoid delays caused by kernel
threads as far as possible. Whether or not this is relevant for your
application depends on your system properties and precision
requirements. Testing precision before taking measurements for
research is highly recommended in any case. Note that network hardware
can have a significant impact on packet timings in the microseconds
range.

.SH EXAMPLE
.P
Send one packet with 400 byte payload every 200µs to localhost for 20
seconds:
.RS
.P
luna -c localhost -g static -a size=400,interval=200 -t 20
.RE

.P
Send packets to 192.0.2.7 with sizes following a Gaussian distribution
around 200 bytes with a standard deviation of 30 bytes and a maximum
packet size of 400 bytes:
.RS
.P
luna -c 192.0.2.7 -g gaussian -a max=400,sigma=30
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.P
capabilities(7)
.P
References to documentation for other LUNA components will be added as
it is written. At the moment, please see the LUNA source code for
analysis and remote control tools.
